all right
first first there are bad news the final
exam will be on on December 19th exactly
one month from today but that's a good
news in some sense right you still have
one month and the exam will be from
12:30 to 3:30 in the afternoon at horse
gym which i think is very appropriate
because you know perhaps I put some
physical exercises on some of the
problems she shoot some hoops and run a
couple circle you have a question so
again you can find this information
online I don't remember but I hope it's
not swimming pool
although for this big class perhaps
that's the only place in on campus where
we can see it everybody if we drain the
water from the pool so our last time
we'll have a discussion about this
Thursday next Thursday so this is next
month okay
December not this one all right but in
the meantime we continue with the vector
calculus and today actually so we kind
of get into more and more interesting
stuff and today we will do some
preparatory work for for a
generalization of a greens theorem which
we discussed last time to the three
dimensional case
come on guys let's focus okay so the
three dimensional example generalization
of our greens theorem is called Stokes
theorem and it is actually very useful
in many areas of science and engineering
I'll talk a little bit about Maxwell
equations today because we'll fine
finally have all the tools needed to
actually formulate Maxwell's equations
which govern electromagnetism but let me
start by drawing an analogy and I guess
this has become sort of a prevailing
theme when this in this in this course
in the last few weeks and I have to say
that the mathematics is really about
finding and exploiting analogies there
are a lot of things which are parallel
and kind of the same ideas and same
patterns play out in different domains
in slightly different ways and if you
learn how they play out in one place you
can actually gain some insights about
how they play out in other areas so
Katyn point is this this type of
theorems which we are discussing right
now which as I said already many times
take the kind of general form integral
over some domain of a derivative of some
of some differential form and here it's
a boundary of this domain and then you
here you have this form itself so this
is a guiding principle and
what we are doing now is we are finding
concrete realizations incarnations of
the general principle in different
dimensions so let's see what we have
let's see what we have found so far so
first of all we have worked with the
case when the dimension of V is 1 in
other words this this object B is a
curve ok so there are bit cells as the
dimension of this object of the curve
right but we always should always
remember that geometric objects they
live in some in some space right so
there is some ambient space and there is
a geometric object itself and we have to
distinguish between them so if you if
you are talking about the curve that's
one dimensional object it could live in
a one dimensional ambient space or it
could live in two dimensional ambient
space or it could live in a three
dimensional indian space and I would
like to distinguish between these cases
now okay so let's first look at the case
when when when the curve is in the
ambient space these are our that is to
say just a real line so here is the real
life and in this case the the one
dimensional object which we will be
integrating over will be will be just an
interval in general it could be union of
several intervals but in that case the
integral would be just the sum over
those integrals therefore without loss
of generality we might as well assume
that our domain is a single interval so
that would be an interval from A to B so
now we are in the realm of a
1-dimensional calculus and in the realm
of 1-dimensional calculus this formula
this general formula takes the following
shape
so Omega first of all
just a function and so on the right hand
side we're simply evaluating the
function at the end points whereas on
the left hand side we are
differentiating the literally the
derivative of this function over this
interval okay so that's the formula that
we are talking about in this case that's
the simplest case really because this is
this corresponds to the smallest
possible dimensions of all objects
involved our domain of integration is
one dimensional and it lives in the one
dimensional ambient space so next next
we generalize this so let me do it like
this so here our nice nice to generalize
it and we can see the ambient space
which is two-dimensional okay so now we
are talking about now we are talking
about the more general curve on a plane
so a curve on the plane would look
something like this so there is some it
can enough at some with wiggling room
you know so we can we can play with it
it doesn't have to be a segment of a
straight line because now we are on the
plane okay in this case we also have a
formula and that's what we call the
fundamental theorem for line integrals
in this case again we have a function f
we have two endpoints
I will now kind of I will now denote
them by capital A and B because here a
and B really correspond it to some real
numbers and now this point that is a and
B they represent points on the plane so
these are not these are not numbers
anymore right and so in this case on the
right we just evaluate our function at
those two points so it's very similar
and on the Left we are taking the line
integral over this curve let's denote
this curve by C as we always do and here
we'll have the line integral of
f dr a line integral of the gradient
vector field right so that's what we
have in the case when the domain is
one-dimensional there is actually one
more there will be one more square when
the ambient space sort would have to
draw it here right the ambient space
will be three dimensional and actually
we stop there I don't have to go any
lower because in this class we as I said
many times we only talk about lines
planes and three-dimensional spaces we
don't talk about four dimensional spaces
for example and we'll talk about three
dimensional spaces later next week and
and week after next
for now I just want to focus to
initiative in in this in full line
integrals I would like to just look at R
and R 2 so now I would like to make an
analogy and my analogy will be with the
case when the dimension of D is 2 in
other words now the domain D in this
formula on the left you can put a
bracket nobody told me
do tell me if you see something odd on
the blackboard so the domain now is
two-dimensional ok so now if it's
two-dimensional we certainly cannot fit
it in a 1 dimensional space so the
simplest example here for the ambient
space is not R but are two so the
ambient not never v8s and again space is
r2 that is really the simplest example
right we don't have smaller you cannot
put a two dimensional object into a
small dimensional space and so what is
it going to look like the analog what's
the analog of of each of these four and
all formulas the pictures and the four
nodes what's the analog of this formula
the analog or first what's the end of
this picture the uncle this picture is
the following it's just a domain which
looks something like
yes we have some corners doesn't matter
and I mean really the interior here the
shaded region so this is D this is now D
and this this domain has a boundary
which I would like to do maybe I'll use
a different color for it so let's just
call it B of G the way we did the way we
did last time B of D the boundary so
maybe to make it more to make them
picture more analogous I'll put yellow
here also that's about it so what I'm
saying is if the first piece of the
analogy is that this red interval is
analogous to this red domain and these
two points these two yellow points are
analogous to this curve right is that
clear yes okay so that's the first thing
so you clearly there is a simple
geometric analogy we just bumped all
dimensions by one whereas here the
domain was one-dimensional and the
boundary with zero dimensional now the
domain is two-dimensional and so the
boundary is one-dimensional
okay just bump everything by one now the
formula the formula is the formula we
learned last time in this formula on the
right hand side on the right hand side
we have the we have the line integral of
a vector field so it we can write it
like this P DX plus Q dy over the
boundary right that's the right hand
side because now this Omega is actually
vector field and we take the line
integral this vector field over the
boundary the boundary remember is
oriented according to the rule special
rule goes counterclockwise like this
okay what about the left hand side the
left hand side now is going to be a
double integral because we are going to
integrate over D and so it is going to
be the integral over the double integral
of over of the expression which it first
looked mysterious but then we discussed
last time what was the meaning of this
expression is so that's the left hand
side so what I'm saying now is that this
formula the analogue of this formula in
this column is the left-hand side of
this here right and the analog of the
right-hand side of this formula in this
column is is this right hand side so
this is very important to realize
because once we see once we see a
general pattern with all of these
formulas they start making a lot more
sense if you don't see this analogies it
looks like a collection of different
formulas which I seem to be totally
unrelated but in fact what I'm trying to
explain is the fact that actually
they're very closely related you see
okay so this is greens theorem this is
greens theorem which we discussed last
time so we have learned this week we
have found these three corners right of
this of this diagram of this picture and
as always you know when you get when you
do an IQ test we talked about this
before you are asked to complete the
diagram right that's what we are going
to do not we will not do it everything
today but we will will start we will
start laying the foundations for proper
understanding of what should go here and
that's what's called Stokes Stokes
theorem
so but we can use this picture to to see
the different elements of what's to come
in this corner okay so we should just
try to generalize by using analogy
between the left and right and also kind
of see the progression from the first
line to the second line so what should
this theorem be about I mean we know we
see that there must be some result here
as well so what should it be about well
first of all we are still within this
colon which means that the dimension I
will use now this word because I don't
have enough space to to work this out
here so I'll just think of this as a
magnified corner of this of this
blackboard so we still in the second
column and that means the dimension is 2
so on the Left we're still going to
integrate over 2 dimensional object but
now the ambient space ambient space
should be three dimensional right why
because because I want to establish an
analogue of what I have here when
ambient space was our to the ambient
space was our tool whereas the object
was a curve so the gap between the
between the dimension of the object and
the dimension of the ambient space was
1:1 and so we want a gap to be 1 here as
well that means two dimensional object
inside three dimensional space ok so
what kind of work let me give you an
example of such an object well the
simplest example of such an object would
be would be a flying a plane in three
dimensional space and here is our
favorite example of a plane this is our
agency this is why by the way I erase
that but you know there is a big game as
we can so of course I hope everybody
knows about this and will come to the
support project so anyway this is the
this is the this is our plane so you see
if we were if
were in the top coat in the top : so to
speak on the top : our two-dimensional
domain is confined within a given plane
so let's say that plane was with this
vertical plane so our domain would be
part of this right and and the plane is
rigid so if we're within that plane
that's all we can do but now we say okay
there is actually three dimensional
space out there so let's look at more
general two dimensional object within
that three dimensional space and the
first thing we can do is we can take for
example the same plane and just rotate
it like this and we can also move it
like this right so we can this way we
can actually get to any plane and then
we can take a piece of that plane so
that would be a more general object than
before slightly more general object
because it would be it would not fit in
the original two-dimensional plane which
was just this so now it would say this
one would not be exactly like this would
not be exactly like this one right so
this is a very small generalization but
never a generalization on the left if we
were if we were in this : if you were
still in this : that would correspond to
just restricting our attention to line
segments but line segments which can go
anywhere on the plane whereas before we
had a line segment confined within
particular line okay but of course there
is here there is a lot more to two
curves we don't just consider line
intervals we also consider this Wiggly
curves like this right so what's the
analog of that kind of object in in our
in this in this in this context so that
would be something which does not fit
even to in a rotated plane right so for
instance of course the simplest example
is a sphere or a sphere is kind of
difficult to draw
so without draw is an upper hemisphere
let me draw an upper Hemisphere and let
me let me use red red color
so this is upper hemisphere you see I
mean the it's like this so it doesn't
fit in any plane it doesn't fit in this
plane I'm drawing it on this plane but
it doesn't live on this plane right
unlike this one which actually fits in a
particular plane so right so this is not
what I'm trying to say is that this is
the analog this is a proper analog
two-dimensional object and log off of a
curve on on the plane and and it also
has a boundary also at the boundary now
I know that one is one confusing point
here oftentimes people get confused why
do we assign to this upper hemisphere or
twos here itself dimension 2 and node 3
and this is kind of common confusion
about how we count dimensions and I
already said it before and I'll say it
again you have to distinguish between
the geometric object and the ambient
space here and drawing a sphere think of
a dome a roof dome shaped move like this
it lives in a three-dimensional space
but it doesn't mean that it itself is
three-dimensional it is two-dimensional
because if you have a little bug on this
living on this on this on the dome the
bug can only go in two independent
directions there are two independent -
only two degrees of freedom sub speaking
which the bug can move not three I mean
it doesn't go in inside or outside it
lives here
then that that's the way that's the way
there so more a more mathematical way to
think about it is the following you can
actually think
flattening flattening this dome this
half dome onto the onto the disk which
which lies at its foundation at its base
and so we can actually identify points
on the dome with with Chris pointing
with the corresponding projections onto
this flat disk so there is actually
one-to-one correspondence between the
dome the hemisphere and the disk now the
disk surely is two-dimensional so
because we establish that you want to
one correspondence that also is an
indication or actually the proof of the
fact that this is also two-dimensional
so this is all to say that it is this
kind of objects that will will have to
integrate in this corner on the left so
on the Left we will be integrating over
things like a sphere like a sphere or or
or upper Hemisphere okay and on the
right what are we supposed to integrate
on the right well you see now we
actually so to understand this picture
we looked at this analogy with analogy
on this side crossing from right to left
now to understand what we're going to be
integrating we we cross from bottom to
top you see if we were in this : the
right hand side actually stays the same
the right hand side stays the same it's
we just take the values of the function
at the endpoint here and here the
difference is that these are the
endpoints of an interval on the line and
these are the end points of a curve on
the plane but structurally it's the same
so that's why we should expect that
going from top to bottom within this
column we should also be integrating
very similar objects so what are we
integrating here
here we are integrating a vector field
which has components P and Q and we
integrate it over the boundary so we
should do the same thing here so this
will be an integral of a vector field
over the boundary
so I will now write it out in a more
detail and so basically I have already I
have already assemble the formula that
we need the Stokes theorem I have
already assembled most of the elements
the only thing which is missing right
now
is this the question mark here what
should that we are here and that should
be the analog of this expression DQ DX
minus DP dy so that's the only thing
which is missing right now okay so but
let me write this let me write out the
right-hand side in more detail first
before I explain what that question mark
stands for so now F is going to be a
vector field in r3 we shouldn't be
scared of that I mean we understand that
vector fields can be on the plane or it
could also be in three-dimensional space
remember we talked about wind maps well
if you think about wind map wind map is
two dimensional so when a wind map would
represent a vector field on a plane but
the actual but what does it mean it
actually means that we male we have to
say where exactly do we measure the wind
vector for this map and usually we just
measure it on the surface right but in
fact if you look at the entire
three-dimensional space each each point
and as we mentioned space has some wind
wind vector even even now in this
classroom there is some there is some
glass winds winds of change so we can
you can you can send some wind right but
the wind actually depends it lives in a
three-dimensional space not just a
two-dimensional space and so and so
that's the vector field in the
three-dimensional space that's that's
totally natural so that's what F is
going to be because now that we live in
a three-dimensional space let's look at
the most general vector fields in a two
dimensional space there is no reason to
confine ourselves to vector fields in
the two dimensional space so that vector
field now has three components is some P
which is a function of XYZ times I like
Q also function of
y'see but let me not write it out just
the same time and our times K where
remember the IJ and K are the three
basis vectors this is I this is J and
this okay this is X this is y Z okay so
the difference is that in the in this
corner of the diagram we consider a
vector field on the plane that vector
field first of all does not have a third
component so it only has P and Q and
second of all because it only lives on
the plane it does not have a dependence
on Z so this is a more general situation
in tooth in two ways first of all we
have a third component R which
corresponds to the third direction K and
also P Q and R all depend on x y&z ok so
then what is FDR well dr as always is
just DX times I plus dy times J plus DZ
times K and so you just take the dot
product of this tool guys and you find
pdx plus qdy plus rdz just like before
before we did not have R so that's why
what we got was just pdx plus qdy which
is which you see on an upper right
corner now we have a slightly more
general expression pdx plus qdy plus rdz
so let me now write down the theorem
which we would like to formulate in more
detail in that theorem we will have on
the right hand side a line integral of
pdx plus qdy plus rdz where p q and r
are three functions three functions of
XYZ
absolutely but in fact it is better to
think about them as components of a
vector field components of one single
vector field F and we have we are going
to integrate over the boundary over over
our surface in three-dimensional space
and a very good example of this is is
upper hemisphere so that is a good a
good picture foot for it okay but of
course there are you can always make
something more fancy like this you know
so it looks like like a little rabbit
you see what I mean okay
and that's the right hand side and on
the left hand side we will we will have
a double integral because we're going to
integrate over the rabbit rabbit head or
over therefore hemisphere I want to
because stay politically correct right I
hope I don't offend any rabbit so let's
just let's just do an upper hemisphere
just to be on the safe side so so we
integrate over maybe I should I should
emphasize that we're here we're
integrating over the yellow thing so
maybe I should raise it now right
actually the whole thing
now I'm really politically correct and
here I'm integrating over the edge over
the red back of which the yellow is the
boundary so in fact now I don't even
have to to make it a dotted line it is
you can actually see the entire boundary
so boundary here okay that clear so
that's exactly the same as in previous
cases and the only question that remains
is what do we have here what should we
integrate here
and that should be something which is
the analog and look of the expression DQ
DX minus DP dy so you can ask why not
just put the same expression DQ DX minus
DP dy that worked in the case when we
had a flat region which fit entirely in
on the plane well there is a problem
with that expression the problem is that
expression is that it does not depend on
R at all only depends on P and Q that's
why it worked when we were on the plane
on the plane our vector field only has
two components P and Q so such an
expression makes sense it depends on
both of them but now the right hand side
depends not only on P and Q it also
depends on R so surely this R should
appear on this side right because of
course if we change our we will get
different answers on the right so it's
impossible to have a formula where on
the right you have R but on the left you
don't have R so it has to be something
like this okay it has to be something
like this and that's what we are going
to find out what exactly is it so here
is the plan
I will have to explain it what kind of
integral first of all we'll have to
learn how to integrate over general
surfaces general surfaces in r3 and the
second is that we will have to find an
analogue of this expression and the
analog of this expression is what's
called curl so define explain what is
what is the curl curl of F which is also
computing the cross product between
nabla and s and finally we will put
everything together and we will write
the left-hand side of this formula we
will have to write following thing it
will be double integral over D of what
we'll call non coral or nabla F like
this dot d s and that will be the answer
that's the answer which will go instead
of the question mark over there and that
will complete our diagram but you see we
can't do it right away now because there
are a couple of things which are missing
first of all we don't know yet how to
integrate over surfaces what we do know
is how to integrate over flat surfaces
but see there's a big difference between
a region like this and the region like
this which is what we are talking about
now okay or think about think about this
curtain you know you can can bend and
shape it in any way you like unlike in a
flat region like this a flat regions we
know how to integrate for this curvy
regions we actually do know something
because we remember at the very
beginning of this course we talked about
a surfaces of revolution and about areas
of the massage services so we actually
know something we know a few examples of
of formulas for surface areas and what
we'll do we'll just generalize that
- also first of all to get surface areas
for general surfaces but also to get la
surface integrals of vector fields which
I like line integrals of vector fields
that we found for curves so we'll will
now proceed to develop this and to kind
of laying down the foundations for this
before explaining what the left-hand
side is and so the first thing we'll do
would like I would like to do is to talk
about the curl because that's sort of
the easier part they said I'll jump more
than algebraic part so what is the curl
any questions about this by the way okay
so speaking of the exam I'm actually
going to put some materials on the
course homepage by the end of this week
I've been asked by some students to to
put the review problems and things like
that before Thanksgiving so that you
guys have more time to to work on this
so I'll do I'll do it this week all
right so first so we talked about curl
so here here F is again a vector field
like on that board with components P Q
and R and curl is just what you would
get by taking the cross product formally
between the vector field and nabla what
do I mean by nabla by nabla I mean a
vector which has components v DF d dy
and DZ G so we just follow the general
rule how to do a cross product to do
cross product we have to make this
diagram this is where in the first row
we put i JK and the second row we put
the component of the first of the two
vectors involved in this case is going
to be d d oops g dx-dz y and g DZ and
then we'll have P Q and R which are the
components of the second vector involved
right that's just the usual formula for
for the cross-product except the novelty
is that well one of this is actually
bonafide a vector field the other one is
kind of strange-looking expression it
has the really partial derivatives at
components but nevertheless we can
assemble this diagram this picture
matrix really is a proper name for it
and taking determinant right so what is
the determinant equal to just the usual
rules apply in front of I we should have
D dy of our - well here we should
multiply them in the order from from the
second row to the third row so it would
be G B D of Q so let me write this down
this means gr dy minus DQ DT times I if
you've I mean just this minus this but
you have to the derivative goes first it
wouldn't make much sense if you wrote Q
times d DV so by D DT of Q makes sense
is the partial derivative of Q and then
we proceed in the same way so the next
one will be d r DX minus DP DZ and
that's J component and finally we will
have for this one we'll have DX of Q
minus DP dy
and so what I'd like to say is that
actually this expression should be
thought of as the analog of of this
express with expression DQ DX minus DP
dy so let me convince you that this is a
good analog for for that expression it's
a good analog for this expression
well first of all let's try to reduce
this formula to the two-dimensional case
the two-dimensional case can be obtained
from the three-dimensional case by first
of all stating our to be equal to zero
and also saying that T is a function of
x and y and Q is a function of x and y
only right if we do that then our vector
field PQ R will actually become just a
vector field PQ on the plane so let's
see what will happen with this formula
if indeed we say that R is 0 P depends
on the next one Y and so does Q well
first of all because R is 0 all terms
involving our go disappear second
because I said that P that does not
depend on Z this will disappear
q does dependency which will disappear
so the first two summons in this formula
will disappear and what will be what
will be the left which will be left with
right so in other words we get the old
expression DQ DX minus DP dy but now we
actually before we thought about it as a
function but now we think about it as a
vector we think about it as a third
component of a vector so on the plane in
other words in space we arrange it like
this our vector field F you know it's a
wind map on the XY plane and the curl of
that vector field actually happens to be
going in the vertical direction
direction of K and it's magnitude is
equal to DQ DX minus DP dy at each point
so it's a slightly different perspective
on this expression before it was a
function now it's a vector but go are
always pointing it in the energy
direction in three-dimensional space but
this is already first indication that
this is a good candidate for it for for
for replacing this formula in the
three-dimensional case in the sense you
see
it's very symmetrical because each time
what happens is it's a we take K and we
get an expression which involves
derivatives of of the remaining two
variables remaining two components P and
Q so K gives us P and Q and we take
derivatives cross derivatives for the
remaining two coordinates x and y and
likewise here for energies J but we we
work with the things which correspond to
X and Z here is I but we work with
things to explain to why X is a and Y
and Z here so that's the first reason
why it's a good replacement for it but
there is actually a better reason
because actually this expression played
a very important role when we talked
about conservative vector fields and
that's that's the next thing that I want
to explain remember conservative vector
field is a vector field which is the
gradient over the over function and
these are very nice vector fields for
example for this vector fields it's very
easy to calculate line integrals we just
have to know the values of the function
at the end points and take the
difference so conservative vector field
vector field I recall first of all let
me recall what happens in r2 in r2 it
means that the vector field which is P
times I plus Q times J is the gradient
of a function for some function
for some function okay and if a vector
field is conservative we can use the
fundamental theorem for line integrals
to evaluate line integrals of such a
vector field and we saw examples of how
nicely this works so it is good to know
when when is a vector field conservative
when is f conservative conservative and
we had a very simple criterion we said
that it is conservative f is
conservative if and only if the
following formula holds DQ DX is equal
to DT dy right remember now there was a
caveat there was a saddle point here
which was that actually that's not
always true it is true if your vector
field is defined over simply connected
domain right because we didn't really
talk about the reasons for this but
actually there is a very simple
geometric reason the point is that if
you have a non simply connected domain
in other words for example you have
something like this or even just remove
one point and your vector field is only
defined here and it cannot be extended
to inside what happens what could happen
is that when you take integrals over say
circles or some curves going around this
region you could get something
non-trivial even if this equation is
satisfied you could get something
non-trivial but we know that the vector
field is conservative if and only if it
seemed to grow line integral over closed
curve no matter whether it goes around
some hole doesn't go around some whole
overall closed for closed curves should
be 0 so the problem is that this
equation almost guarantees that such
integrals are zero what is truly
guarantee that such integrals are zero
when you can when you can contract
your curve your closed curve to a point
here you cannot contract to a point and
that's why this argument breaks down so
this is only true if your vector field
is defined on a simply connected domain
now what does it simply connected domain
in if you look at all the say homework
exercises that we will have 99% of the
examples are vector tools which are
actually defined everywhere on the plane
they don't have any poles any
singularities right so in fact this is
the main in this course we mostly focus
on size vector fields so let's assume
for now that the vector field actually
is defined everywhere on the entire
plane and the plane is simply connected
non simply collected things as things
like you have to remove some points that
would mean that your vector field
actually has poles you have some like 1
over x squared plus y squared in the
denominator so let's suppose to simplify
matters that F is actually defined
everywhere is defined on the entire
plane everywhere define defined
everywhere on our toy then this issue
has not arrived and this is actually
true statement it would not have been a
true statement had I not made this
assumption that rectitude is defined on
a simply a simply connected domain so
then this is actually very simple
criterion but what is this formula what
does this formal say it says that the
difference between these two guys is
zero
let me erase this but we will remember
this suppose that is defined everywhere
okay so this is the criterion and now we
can appreciate more even more this
expressive strange-looking expression DQ
DX minus DP dy this strange-looking
expression tells us whether our vector
field is conservative or not if it is 0
this vector field is conservative
provided is defined everywhere and if
it's not 0 then for sure it's not
conservative you see that's exactly this
expression that we are talking about
that's expression which appears in
Green's formula okay and if this formula
is correct it is this formula satisfied
and we actually have an algorithm how to
find how to find F we talked about it
before and you must have you must have
done some some exercises doing this and
you see the point is that you can try to
apply this algorithm in the case when
this formula is not satisfied but you
get stuck you'll hear that it doesn't
work there is Network you will not be
able to find a function f so the first
step when you're asked whether the
vector field is concerns or not is to
compute this expression and see if it is
0 or not ok so the reason why I'm saying
all this is because the notion of
conservative vector field makes sense
not only for vector fields on the plane
like this but also for vector fields in
three-dimensional space and if I want to
if I really want to prove to you or
convince you that this curl now in
three-dimensional in the
three-dimensional case place the role of
this expression that would be a very
simple test would I be able to use this
expression to test as to whether or to
to see as to whether my vector field is
conservative or not so that would be the
second argument in favor of
in favor of this expression so let's
talk about vector fields in
three-dimensional space now in r3 in r3
we have a vector field which is VI plus
QJ another the third component which is
RK and what we would like to do is we
would like to apply the same notion well
a vector field is called conservative
conservative again if it is equal to
nabla F this is number F the gradient
makes sense on the plane and in space
it's just that now it is going to have
as components is going to have the DF DX
I plus DF dy J plus DF gzk in the two
dimensional case we would not have the
storm and now we'll have the storm but
but this notion makes sense anyway in
both cases
and now we can again ask the question
when is f conservative and the answer is
given by the following theorem let's
suppose again that F is defined
everywhere is well defined well defined
means that it does not have poles so for
example if you have a vector field which
you may have seen minus y i plus XJ
divided by x squared plus y squared this
is what makes it ill-defined or not well
defined because this gives you in zero
at one x and y are equal to 0 0 you get
a pole
you cannot evaluate this vector field at
this point so this vector field is not
defined on the entire plane but for
example vector field like this it's
certainly defined everywhere on the
plane that's what I mean when I say that
F is well-defined we find everywhere in
earth so I assume that if we assume that
and saying that F is conservative
conservative is equivalent to saying
that the curl zero and that is a
justification for saying that
that's another justification for saying
that the curl is a good replacement for
this expression which in fact which in
fact can be found is one of the
components this one for the curl
okay and this is actually proved this is
actually proved by using Stokes theorem
which we are now trying to establish so
this is tutele this is this was all this
long discussion was to convince you of
the importance and usefulness of the
strange-looking expression you know
because you probably thought on Tuesday
that this looks strange well now this
looks even more strange right so like
what what does it mean we'll talk more
about the meaning of this later but at
least now you see that it is useful it
is it play it is a very functional thing
it is first of all it reduces to the old
expression for when our vector field
actually is a vector field in the plane
and second of all it can be used as a
criterion or for a criteria as to
whether the vector field is conservative
in the three-dimensional space just the
way we used this criterion in on the
plane so let's see how it works in
practice let's suppose you are given a
vector field now in the
three-dimensional space and you are
asked is the second field conservative
and if so find the potential function
find the function f for which this
vector field is the group of which this
vector field is the gradient so here is
an example suppose your vector field is
like this e to the Z I plus J plus X e
to the Z K the question is is a
conservative well first of all let's see
it is well-defined everywhere there are
no poles there are no singularities we
can evaluate we can find the value of
the electric field for any X Y Z no no
expressions like 1 over x squared plus y
squared so great we can then apply this
theorem
says that if F is well define everywhere
it is to find out whether it's
conservative it's sufficient to just
calculate this so let's calculate the
curl so we just write ijk DX dy DZ and
we have e to the Z 1 and X e to the Z so
we start calculating what do we find
so here you have you to have to take a
derivative of respect to Y partial
derivative with respect to Y of this
expression it does not depend on Y so
that's 0 minus D DZ of 1 that's 0 to 0
good
next you have J let me put minus D DX of
X e to the Z that's e to the D minus D
DZ of e to the Z also heated so that's 0
also plus K times D DX of 1 that's 0
minus D dy of e to the Z that's 0 also
of your ok so this is indeed the zero
vector please please note that I put a
arrow an arrow over this zero remember
we talked to we have another kind of a
we had a conversation about this a while
ago about different zeros right a coral
is not a function it's a vector field so
we cannot if you put it like this if you
put zero like this that would mean that
would be okay for a function but saying
that it's zero is more than saying that
the function is zero it means that three
functions are zero not just one but
three functions the components in front
of I J and K and that means that this is
zero as a vector it is has all
components you that's what this criteria
means so criterion is actually
collection of three equations not just
one but three equations okay great so
this is satisfied so it is conservative
so answer is yes okay
a follow-up question what a question is
if you're so smart and you know it's
conservative find the function for which
it is the gradient right and and that's
really very easy to do we just follow
the same algorithm that we used in
two-dimensional case to find f such that
F is equal to nabla okay so what we do
is we take for which we start doing
antiderivative and you use the first
time you take on to the roof suspect one
of the three variables and then you
continue so we have to make a choice so
let's just do a three four way let's
take anti derivative with respect to of
the first of the first function take
anti derivative of e to the Z with
respect to X so what do we get we get x
times e to the Z but that's not all we
have to add the constant when we take
anti derivatives but now this constant
is not really constant it is a constant
with respect to X which is a variable
and which means we differentiate so the
constant actually could depend on Y and
V so it's not really constant as a
function of y and z that's what the
first step of the algorithm tells us now
we we're going to we're going to
differentiate this respect to Y
differentiate or let's just say take D
dy click D dy well this will be 0 and
this will be the C V what we are
supposed to get the second component of
our vector vector field which is 1
because see I wrote the component the
second component is J it means 1 times J
so this is this should be 1
if this is one it means the C is equal
to y plus another constant let's call it
t1 but so if we were working with a
vector field in two variables vector
field on the plane which depends on your
next and why that's where we would stop
but now we have a third variable so a
priori this c1 could depend on the last
variable which remains which is V so we
have to just make one more step in this
algorithm otherwise it looks exactly the
same as before so now we should take ddz
of this of what we have to assemble our
what we've learned so far but we've
learned so far is that F is equal to
this but this C is equal to this so that
means that we can replace now G C in
this formula by y plus c1 and now we
have to take the derivative of this
whole thing with the tech to Z so we
find X equal to Z roof of this is 0 plus
c1 prime and we should compare it to the
expression which we were given we were
given X e to the Z so that means that Z
prime is actually 0 which means that
actually C prime is a constant sorry C
c1 prime so c1 prime C 1 naught C 1
prime C 1 prime is 0 C 1 is actually
constant is it known as constant doesn't
have any heating dependence on anything
ok so the answer is
the answer is that F is Noblet habla of
the function which we found which is X e
to the Z plus y plus c1 but this is
actually constant okay any questions yes
yes okay let me switch the board I think
the derivative of first I have to assert
to reload F to use all the information I
found so far right I have found that it
is equal to this from the previous step
where this is already just a function of
D because I found that C of X this was C
of Y Z but we have found that it's y
plus C 1 over C so I already put this
back for the function f right and now I
think the derivative of this respect to
Z and this is what I get
yeah and now I have to compare it to my
component the third component of my
vector field which is X e to the Z right
at the very top row in front of key you
have X e to the G so I say this is equal
X e to the G so I can cancel out the
guys and I end up with c1 prime is 0
that means C 1 is actually a constant it
actually does not depend on Z and that
gives me the answer okay all right any
other questions ok so this is how it
works it actually works in a very
similar way and this was also convinced
you that of importance of this Coral and
this is the this is expression which we
will use for which we will use to
establish the Stokes formula that
elusive formula which appears in now in
the lower right corner
if you if you think if you if you
thought this was too much too many
formulas there's actually one more which
is called divergence and divergence we
won't need until the last lecture but
since this is in this chapter of the
book I guess the idea being let's just
put it all on the table all the
derivatives that we have and let's look
at all of them at the same time ok so we
might as well I might as well write a
formula for divergence so divergence is
also an operation on vector fields in
three-dimensional space which we can
think of as a ghost product a dot
product as opposed to a cross product
with nabla so in other words it is V P
DX plus vq g y plus g RG z so it's a
very interesting iteration it takes the
vector field and it spits out a function
another vector field
let's spits out a function and the nice
thing about it so far it's not clear
what is U in good form but here is one
result which is which might convince you
that it is important which is that if we
take the divergence of off a curl
the last thing you will have some vector
field F let's first apply to it curl
that is to say cross product with nabla
that's what's given by this formula so
we get some expression right
and let's take now the divergence of the
result in other words you start to
choose these three components there's
this and this into this formula these
are not the P Q and R of the original F
but these are P Q and R of the of the
coral okay so so you'll get actually
double derivatives so it looks like a
really ugly expression but actually it
turns out to be zero so that's the good
thing so this is something this is kind
of a kryptonite for for coral that's
what kills curls a coral is very
complicated but there is a nice formula
which actually kills curl and now we can
actually assemble all of this all of
this operations we've learned up to now
and now we can actually see that there
is some system to this but it's not
random let me explain this we have
learned we have learned three different
iterations
we have learned three different
iterations the first one was the
gradient the gradient goes from
functions to vector fields you have a
function f you get a vector field nabla
F right that's the first iteration we've
learned the second iteration we should
learn today goes from vector fields to
vector fields all in our three own space
and that's the curl it takes the vector
field and it takes an extended to its
curl which maybe is better to call a
curl a kind of emphasize that is
different from this guy even though I
really like the plantation nabla cross F
but for the purpose of this diagram
maybe I'll just stick to curl too to
emphasize the difference and now we've
learned one more which is the divergence
and divergence now goes from vector
tools to functions so you start with
functions go to vector field and vector
field the vector field and there is
another operation which goes from vector
tools back to function so this one takes
the vector field and with my absolute -
divergence right so three different
operations and now we've learned a very
interesting aspect of this since you
have the three different operations you
can apply two operations one after
another you can start with a function
and you can apply the gradient you get
this vector field because it's a vector
field we can apply to eat the coral
right and what do we get this way zero
right this is exactly the theorem which
we which I have formulated in other
words if you apply this operation twice
and you take curl of nabla F you get
zero
this is this is this formula because
again coral is the same I recall looking
maybe right at one more time so
divergence we can write like this and
curl we can also write as course it's
just not patient the same that is two
different notation of choices of
notation for the same thing
so you see apply these two operations
one after another and and you get 0 but
0 with an arrow that's interesting right
what about if we apply this one and then
this one so that means take a vector
field take its curl and then apply the
divergence also get 0 that's this
formula right here it's the same as
writing it we can write it like that
this is an 0 without an arrow because it
is a function it's a function 0 is not
to get continuous so you see we have
three different operations and this
operations have this property that if
you apply two of them in sequence you
get 0 I want I would like to contrast
that with something we discussed last
time about taking boundary if you have
geometric option if you have a geometric
object like like a domain we discussed
now if I can take it boundary right
we can take it boundary so we just get
this and let's apply boundary one more
time is there is there a mistake what if
you take the gradient of divergence I
see I see
so in other what you want to apply it
like this well you get what's called a
laplacian so I think no the question is
the other way sorry
see the point is that actually that
would be like going up that would deal
going from like kind of going back to
the bottom to the top and in fact it
should be we should only be going down
so it doesn't look it doesn't look right
but it's a good it's a good idea in a
way it's a good idea but it's important
here to go down just like for boundaries
so see what I'm trying to explain now
money the point that I'm trying to
explain is that this property that if
you decide to have an operation which
kind of goes makes it where we go one
step and if you take it twice you get
zero and that I will trying to explain
is it's exactly like taking the boundary
when you take the boundary you go lower
dimension by one and you see and if you
take boundary one more time you got
nothing so this by the way it's another
zero this is empty it means empty empty
set but for our purposes is like zero
nothing so the point is if you think
about this is a very it's a very
intuitive concept boundary write the
energy metric object has a boundary and
then you can once you realize that there
is such a thing as boundary and you just
start thinking about it's like what is
the boundary of a boundary right and why
not you can take a boundary why not take
boundary of a boundary and it first
looks like a good idea but then you
realize that actually it
always gives you empty set so there is
this very interesting geometric
structure taking the boundary and it has
its very interesting property which
mathematicians call impotency
it's an important actor ation important
meaning that if you square it you get
zero so now you try to look for such an
operation algebraically and algebraic
world in the world of functions and
vector fields and this is what you find
you find that the existing there indeed
we did such operations which have the
same important property that if you
square it if you apply it twice you get
zero and this is a very important aspect
of these formulas that we are trying to
establish the formulas relating relating
integrals in different dimensions
because this is what I call in my you
know in this guiding principle this is
what I call D you see I explained
already many times that the general
guiding principle which we were pursuing
here has to do with integrating over
domains and boundaries and then here you
have some limit some algebraic object
and its derivative so bound so from
going from left to right you take the
boundary just like this and going from
right to left you take the derivative
and now here is the derivative that I'm
talking about here I lay a later element
on the table if you start with a
function when you are doing on when the
sort of going from 0 to 1 you take the
gradient then you take the coral and
then you take the divergence and then
separation D which kind of an algebraic
operation it lives in a different world
but turns out that first of all there is
a there is a trade off between this two
which gives us this beautiful identity
and also it has exactly the same
property as B in other words d squared
is 0 just like d squared
so there is a parallel analogy between
the genetic world in the end algebraic
world in which taking boundary on the
genetic side corresponds to taking the
derivative in this sense on the other
side and this formula is just the
expression of the fact that one
operation is kind of dual to the other
so in some sense they are one and the
same okay so that that's what the
formulas are all about
they look complicated they look very
abstract but in fact they are all part
of a very conceptual phenomenon very
very very conceptual thing and very very
important phenomenon in mathematics and
as a bonus we can now write down we can
now write down the Maxwell equations
because max equations use so this is a
quarrel with some divergence and now I
can write down an equation because this
equation use coral and divergence so in
the macrophage muscle equations are the
equations which govern electromagnetism
which govern the behavior of electrical
magnetic fields well you know that there
are first of all their electric fields
for example if you have a charge if you
have charged particles they will if the
if they have opposite charges that will
attract if they have the same charges
they will repel each other right that's
electric field so if you have a cute
apple if you put a charge somewhere if
you put for example there the nucleus of
of an atom is a consists of some protons
and neutrons and protons have positive
charge so neutrons have neutral charge
but protons have positive charge so they
all they create a field which would
which would grab you know end and
attract electrons which are negatively
charged particles so it's a very
important field there is also magnetic
field that's the field that you have
when you you know have a magnet and you
have a someone told me story that they
drop the key at night in
in a puddle and it's like what do you do
and there is a very nice solution you
take a big magnet and you put it in the
water and boom you got you got your key
see
so that's magnetic field so that's also
very important and not just for finding
keys I suppose right so now you look for
equations which govern electric and
magnetic fields and here are the
equations which were written in 19th
century by Maxwell as well as other
people so the usually the notation we
choose is like this need for electric
field and B is for magnetic field these
are just vector fields just like the
kind of vector fields which we talked
about like on that board here is the
vector field so electrical magnetic
fields are just vector field like this
but they change you know they change in
space and which also depends on time and
this equation describes how they depend
on on space and time and the equations
look surprisingly simple deceptively
simple perhaps I should say but let me
let me assume that there are no charges
and currents so it's kind of equation in
the vacuum if you will just to simplify
just to give you a flavor what this
equations look like no charges or
current so the equations just involve
the good this is the divergence and the
curl so that's the first equation see
this is the divergence of e is 0 and you
have divergence of B is 0 and then the
curl of e is minus 1 over C V V DT the
derivative respect to time and the curl
of B is 1 over C de now what is C C the
speed of light speed of light
which is approximately equal to 300,000
kilometers per second it's very it's
very fast but it's it's not infinite
it's finite so this is very important
actually so you see so these are the
equations we wouldn't be able to
understand on this to read this
equations to even understand this
equations if we did not define the curl
and and and the divergence what's
perhaps more important is that this
method this formula that we are proving
now this guiding principle and various
incarnations that we're talking about
are by using those we can actually
derive very important consequences for
example the Gauss law that amperes law
and things like that but if you just
look at this and it's really I think
it's amazing that such complicated
interaction you know which governs
basically the entire universe these two
forces to listen in the entire universe
can be summarized basically half of a
blackboard in this very neat and
beautiful way and just looking at it
formulas you already see some very
important things which actually were
which were so in some sense the
cornerstones of physics of the 20th 21st
and 22nd so on centuries the first thing
you see is that these numbers you have
this number which doesn't see the speed
of light does not depend on anything
right it's just a constant here which is
a which is actually an incredibly
powerful statement because in our real
incredible in our everyday life we are
used to the fact that velocity or speed
depends on who the observer is you know
if you are if you are standing here and
there is a there is a there is a bicycle
going in this direction right
anyway doesn't matter okay so let's say
with some with some with some speed
right this is the speed which you see
but if you are going on a bicycle in
this direction or if you are walking
with some speed right you will see you
will observe a different speed but if
you are with the speed of light it's not
like this a speed of light will appear
in the same way to the this observer and
to this observer you don't add the
velocities one way or the other it is
constant this is what Maxwell's
equations indicate and this was one of
the first arguments for Einstein to
create his special relativity theory he
said look this equations work so what
would be show us is that the speed of
light is constant in all inertial
coordinate systems that was the first
one of the first steps in creating
special relativity I'm telling you all
this to convince you that the kind of
stuff we are doing is not just a bunch
of formulas that you need to memorize
but actually stuff this stuff makes
sense and this stuff is very important
okay
so we'll continue on until then
Gobert